#### From: https://mgba.io/2015/06/27/cycle-counting-prefetch/

- The BIOS (region 0), which contains basic interrupt handling code and a handful of utility functions for doing common operations, such as decompressing game data or waiting for the end of a frame. This region has zero wait states, although it can only be read from while executing code from within the region.
- The External Working RAM (region 2), which is 256kiB and is used for storing memory that doesn’t need to be handled frequently. There is a 16-bit bus to access this memory, so loading 32-bit values from it requires an additional S cycle above the first N or S cycle to load the upper 16-bits of the value. (E)WRAM has 2 wait states, regardless of if it’s N or S, so the first access is always 3 cycles, as is the second, so loading a 32-bit value will always take 6 cycles. (It is possible to “overclock” the WRAM, but no games do this, and it can crash the system.)
- The Internal Working RAM (region 3) is on the same chip as the ARM7TDMI itself, and has no wait states whatsoever. It’s useful for storing 32kiB of active memory, including the execution stack and interrupt handlers.
- Memory-mapped I/O registers (region 4) contains 16-bit registers that are used for configuring the system itself. It also has no wait states, but is only useful for configuring the system, not storing anything or executing code.
- Palette memory (region 5) contains the color table used for graphics on the screen. There are no wait states here.
- Video RAM (region 6) contains all of the graphics that will be drawn to the screen. It’s primarily accessible with 16-bit read/writes and unexpected things happen with 8-bit read/writes. VRAM has no wait states, unless the graphics subsystem is trying to use VRAM, in which case the processor will stall for one cycle. Note that this alone adds a level of complexity making timing not easy to manage. This memory is very fast for executing code if you don’t want to put it in IWRAM. There’s no real reason to do this, but it’s possible to do.
- Object Attribute Memory (region 7) contains configuration values for the sprites (referred to as OBJs in the GBA). There are zero wait states here, unless the graphics system is trying to access the OAM at that time, at which point the processor will stall for one cycle.
- Game Pak ROM (regions 8–13) contains up to 32MiB of memory that resides on the cartridge. The cartridge bus is also 16-bits, but N cycles and S cycles have different timing on this bus—they are configurable. N cycles can be configured to have either 2, 3, 4, or 8 wait states in these regions. S cycles actually depend on which specific address is used. Region 8/9 has either 1 or 2 wait states, region 10/11 has either 1 or 4, and region 12/13 has either 1 or 8. Regions 10-13 are mostly unused, however, so most of what’s important is region 8/9.
- Game Pak RAM (region 14) contains rewritable memory on the cartridge. The bus is only 8 bits wide, and wait states are configurable to be either 2, 3, 4, or 8 cycles. There are no special S cycles on this bus.
